Add Nautobot App migration docs for Region and Site to Location data migration (#3350)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/plugins/region-and-site-data-migration-guide.md

!!! note
    You can skip this step only if your data models already have both a `site` (or `region`) field and a `location` field.

```python
# models.py

class ExampleModel(OrganizationalModel):
    site = models.ForeignKey(to="dcim.Site", on_delete=models.PROTECT, blank=True, null=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=20, help_text="The name of this Example.")
...
```

**DO NOT** delete the `site` ForeignKey field yet. As a first step, just add a `ForeignKey` to `dcim.Location` with all other arguments identical to the existing `dcim.Site` `ForeignKey`:

```python
# models.py

class ExampleModel(OrganizationalModel):
    site = models.ForeignKey(to="dcim.Site", on_delete=models.PROTECT, blank=True, null=True)
    location = models.ForeignKey(to="dcim.Location", on_delete=models.PROTECT, blank=True, null=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=20, help_text="The name of this Example.")
...
```

Make the migration file by running `nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_name]`, for example:

```shell

> nautobot-server makemigrations example_plugin -n add_location_field_to_example_model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nautobot-server makemigrations example_app -n add_location_field_to_example_model
```

```

Apply the migration file by running `nautobot-server migrate [app_name]`, for example:

```shell
nautobot-server migrate example_app
```

## Create an Empty Migration File and Write the Data Migration

> After you make sure that all `Site`/`Region` related models have `location` fields on them, it is time to migrate `Site`/`Region` references in your data to `Location`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you make sure that all `Site`/`Region` related models have `Location` fields on them, it is time to migrate `Site`/`Region` references in your data to `Location`.
```

> Django doesn't automatically know how to do this; we have to create an empty migration file and write the migration script ourselves. This is also known as a [data migration](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.1/topics/migrations/#data-migrations).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Django doesn't automatically know how to do this; we have to create an empty migration file and write the migration script ourselves. This is also known as a [data migration](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.2/topics/migrations/#data-migrations).
```

Create a migration file first by running `nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_file_name] --empty`, for example:

```shell
nautobot-server makemigrations example_app -n migrate_app_data_from_site_to_location --empty
```

> The empty migration file will look like this with the only dependency being our previous migration that added a `location` ForeignKey field to our `ExampleModel`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The empty migration file will look like this with the only dependency being our previous migration that added a `Location` ForeignKey field to our `ExampleModel`:
```

```python
# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 15:38
# 0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location

from django.db import migrations

class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    dependencies = [
        ("example_app", "0007_add_location_field_to_example_model"),
    ]
    operations = []
```

!!! warning
    First we need to add a mandatory dependency to a Nautobot 2.0 migration file, namely `("dcim", "0030_migrate_region_and_site_data_to_locations")`. This dependent migration is very important as it creates the `Location` and `LocationType` records corresponding to the existing `Site`/`Region` records, which you will need to reference to migrate your data.

>     **Without it, you data migration might not work!**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    **Without it, your data migration might not work!**
```

```

Finally, we need to add `migrations.RunPython` to the `operations` attribute in the migration class to execute this function when the migration is applied:

```python
    operations = [
        migrations.RunPython(
            # Execute the function
            code=migrate_example_model_data_to_locations,
            reverse_code=migrations.operations.special.RunPython.noop,
        )
    ]

```

The final migration file might look like this:

```python
# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 15:38
# 0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location

from django.db import migrations

def migrate_example_model_data_to_locations(apps, schema_editor):

    ExampleModel = apps.get("example_app", "examplemodel")
    LocationType = apps.get("dcim", "locationtype")
    Location = apps.get("dcim", "location")
    # Get "Site" LocationType
    site_location_type = LocationType.objects.get(name="Site")

    if  ExampleModel.objects.exists():
        # Query ExampleModel instances with non-null site field
        example_models = ExampleModel.objects.filter(site__isnull=False).select_related("site", "location")

>         for  example_model  in  example_models:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        for  example_model in example_models:
```

            site_name = example_model.site.name
            # Point the location field to the corresponding "Site" LocationType Location
            # with the same name.
            example_model.location = Location.objects.get(location_type=site_location_type, name=site_name)
        ExampleModel.objects.bulk_update(example_models, ["location"], 1000)

class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    dependencies = [
        # The dcim migration creates the Site Type and Region Type Locations that
        # your data models are migrating to. It has to be run **before** this migration.
        ("dcim", "0030_migrate_region_and_site_data_to_locations"),
        ("example_app", "0007_add_location_field_to_example_model"),
    ]
    operations = [
        migrations.RunPython(
            # Execute the function
            code=migrate_example_model_data_to_locations,
            reverse_code=migrations.operations.special.RunPython.noop,
        )
    ]
```

## Remove Site/Region Related Fields from Migrated Data Models

> After the data migration is successful, we need to remove the `site`/`region` fields from your data model so that Nautobot will be able to remove the `Site` and `Region` models. You can do that by simply removing the `site`/`region` attributes from your model class:

Reviewer 2: Maybe call out here that this needs to go in a separate migration file from the first, since the first is migrating data and this is changing the schema?

    # Query ExampleModel instances with non-null site field
    example_models = ExampleModel.objects.filter(site__isnull=False, location__isnull=True).select_related("site", "location")
    for example_model in example_models:
        # Point the location field to the corresponding "Site" LocationType Location
        # with the same name.
        example_model.location = example_model.site.migrated_location
    ExampleModel.objects.bulk_update(example_models, ["location"], 1000)

class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    dependencies = [
        # The dcim migration creates the Site Type and Region Type Locations that
        # your data models are migrating to. It has to be run **before** this migration.
        ("dcim", "0030_migrate_region_and_site_data_to_locations"),
        ("example_app", "0007_add_location_field_to_example_model"),
    ]
    operations = [
        migrations.RunPython(
            # Execute the function
            code=migrate_example_model_data_to_locations,
            reverse_code=migrations.operations.special.RunPython.noop,
        )
    ]
```

## Remove Site/Region Related Fields from Migrated Data Models

> After the data migration is successful, we need to remove the `site`/`region` fields from your data model so that Nautobot will be able to remove the `Site` and `Region` models. Note that we need to remove those attributes in a separate migration file from the previous since they are two different operations. You can do that by simply removing the `site`/`region` attributes from your model class:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the data migration is successful, we need to remove the `site`/`region` fields from your data model so that Nautobot will be able to remove the `Site` and `Region` models. Note that we need to remove those attributes in a separate migration file from the previous one, as it's never a good practice to combine data migrations and schema migrations in the same file. You can do this by simply removing the `site`/`region` attributes from your model class:
```

```python
    # Ensure this migration is run before the migration that removes Region and Site Models
    run_before = [
        # TODO we need to change the name after we reorder migration files
        ("dcim", "0034_remove_region_and_site"),
    ]
```

The final migration file might look like this:

```python
# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 17:09
# 0009_remove_site_field_from_example_model.py

from django.db import migrations

class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    
    # Ensure this migration is run before the migration that removes Region and Site Models
    run_before = [
        # TODO we need to change the name after we reorder migration files
        ("dcim", "0034_remove_region_and_site"),
    ]
    dependencies = [
        ("example_app", "0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location"),
    ]

    operations = [
        migrations.RemoveField(
            model_name="examplemodel",
            name="site",
        ),
    ]
```

> Apply the migration file by running `nautobot-server migrate [app_name]`, for example:

Reviewer 3: Is this applying all three of the migrations that were just authored in a single pass? I don't see this step earlier in the file.

What version of Nautobot itself needs to be running, and which of its migrations must and must not have already run for this migration to be successful? (Presumably the `example_app` migration will fail if `dcim.0034_remove_region_and_site` has already run, for example?)

# Region and Site Related Data Model Migration Guide

> `Region` and `Site` models are collapsed into `Location` in Nautobot V2.0. As a result, all the `Region` and `Site` related data models are being migrated to use `Location` as well. Below is a comprehensive guide for Nautobot App developers to migrate their `Region` and `Site` related data models to `Location`.

Reviewer 3: I feel like the first and second sentences here are redundant/repetitive but I'm not sure what to suggest as a rewrite.

We will be using `ExampleModel` as a relatively simple and hands-on example throughout this guide to better your understanding of the migration process.

## Add Location Fields to Site and Region Related Data Models

> `ExampleModel` right now has a `site` ForeignKey field but it does not have a `location` ForeignKey field. We need to add one before we run any other migrations in this guide.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the `ExampleModel` currently has a `site` ForeignKey field but it does not have a `location` ForeignKey field, you will need to add the `location` field before any other migrations in this guide.
```

!!! note

>     You can skip this step your data models already have both `site`/`region` fields and a `location` field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    You can skip this step only if your data models already have both a `site` (or `region`) field and a `location` field.
```

```python
# models.py

class ExampleModel(OrganizationalModel):
    site = models.ForeignKey(to="dcim.Site", on_delete=models.PROTECT, blank=True, null=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=20, help_text="The name of this Example.")
    number = models.IntegerField(default=100, help_text="The number of this Example.")
    csv_headers = ["name", "number"]

    class Meta:

>         ordering = ["name"]

Reviewer 3: Not sure `number`, `csv_headers`, and the `Meta` class add much to this example - consider removing them?

...
```

> **DO NOT** delete the `site` ForeignKey field yet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**DO NOT** delete the `site` ForeignKey field yet. As a first step, just add a `ForeignKey` to `dcim.Location` with all other arguments identical to the existing `dcim.Site` `ForeignKey`:
```

```python
# models.py

class ExampleModel(OrganizationalModel):
    site = models.ForeignKey(to="dcim.Site", on_delete=models.PROTECT, blank=True, null=True)
    location = models.ForeignKey(to="dcim.Location", on_delete=models.PROTECT, blank=True, null=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=20, help_text="The name of this Example.")
    number = models.IntegerField(default=100, help_text="The number of this Example.")
    csv_headers = ["name", "number"]

    class Meta:
        ordering = ["name"]
...
```

Make the migration file by running:

```shell
nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_name]

> nautobot-server makemigrations example_plugin -n add_location_field_to_example_model

Reviewer 3: Let's change `example_plugin` to `example_app` throughout this document?

> ```shell
> nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_name]
> nautobot-server makemigrations example_plugin -n add_location_field_to_example_model
> ```
> 
> Apply the migration file by running:
> 
> ```shell
> nautobot-server migrate [app_name]
> nautobot-server migrate example_plugin
> ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```shell
# nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_name]
nautobot-server makemigrations example_plugin -n add_location_field_to_example_model
```

Apply the migration file by running:

```shell
# nautobot-server migrate [app_name]
nautobot-server migrate example_plugin
```
````

> ## Create an Empty Migration File to Manually Migrate the Data

Reviewer 3: I'm concerned that "manually migrate" will scare people off here. :-) The migration will still be automated, we'll just need to write some code that isn't auto-generated. Perhaps:

```suggestion
## Create an Empty Migration File and Write the Data Migration
```

> After you make sure that all `Site`/`Region` related models have `location` fields on them, it is time to migrate `Site`/`Region` Data to `Location`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After you make sure that all `Site`/`Region` related models have `location` fields on them, it is time to migrate `Site`/`Region` references in your data to `Location`.
```

> We have to create an empty migration file and run an manual migration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Django doesn't automatically know how to do this; we have to create an empty migration file and write the migration script ourselves.
```

We can do that by creating a migration file first:

```shell

> nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_file_name] --empty

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_file_name] --empty
```

nautobot-server makemigrations example_plugin -n migrate_app_data_from_site_to_location --empty
```

The empty migration file will look like this, the only dependency is our previous migration that added a `location` ForeignKey field to our `ExampleModel`:

```python
# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 15:38
# 0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location

from django.db import migrations

class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    dependencies = [
        ("example_plugin", "0007_add_location_field_to_example_model"),
    ]
    operations = []
```

> First we need to add a mandatory dependency to the migration file, namely `("dcim", "0030_migrate_region_and_site_data_to_locations")`. This dependent migration is very important as it creates the `Site`/`Region` `LocationType` locations for you to migrate your data to.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First we need to add a mandatory dependency to a Nautobot 2.0 migration file, namely `("dcim", "0030_migrate_region_and_site_data_to_locations")`. This dependent migration is very important as it creates the `Location` and `LocationType` records corresponding to the existing `Site`/`Region` records, which you will need to reference to migrate your data.
```

> **Without it, your manual migration might not work!**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Without it, your data migration might not work!**
```

> **Without it, your manual migration might not work!**

Reviewer 4: IMO make this a big WARNING admonition.

```python
# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 15:38
# 0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location

from django.db import migrations

> class  Migration(migrations.Migration):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
class Migration(migrations.Migration):
```

    dependencies = [
        # The dcim migration creates the Site Type and Region Type Locations that
        # your data models are migrating to. It has to be run **before** this migration.
        ("dcim", "0030_migrate_region_and_site_data_to_locations"),
        ("example_plugin", "0007_add_location_field_to_example_model"),
    ]
    operations = []
```

> Now we can write the function that does the manual migration. We need to query `ExampleModel` instances that have non-null `site` field and point their `location` field to "Site" `LocationType` locations that have the same names and other attributes as their respective `Sites`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we can write the function that will perform the data migration. We need to query `ExampleModel` instances that have non-null `site` field and point their `location` field to the new `Location` records that have the same names and other attributes as their respective `Sites`.
```

> Now we can write the function that does the manual migration. We need to query `ExampleModel` instances that have non-null `site` field and point their `location` field to "Site" `LocationType` locations that have the same names and other attributes as their respective `Sites`.

Reviewer 4: Let's be cautious about using controlled vocabulary. The data migration must be created manually, but it's actually a data migration, so I think it would be better to describe that and then use "data migration" consistently.

```suggestion
Now we can write the function that does the data migration. We need to query `ExampleModel` instances that have non-null `site` field and point their `location` field to "Site" `LocationType` locations that have the same names and other attributes as their respective `Sites`.
```

Below is what the function might look like:

```python

# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 15:38
# 0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location

from django.db import migrations

def migrate_example_model_data_to_locations(apps, schema_editor):

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # Always use the provided `apps` to look up models, rather than importing them directly!
```

    ExampleModel = apps.get("example_plugin", "examplemodel")
    LocationType = apps.get("dcim", "locationtype")
    Location = apps.get("dcim", "location")
    # Get "Site" LocationType
    site_location_type = LocationType.objects.get(name="Site")

>     if ExampleModel.objects.exists():

Reviewer 3: I'd be tempted to leave this check out for simplicity - if the queryset below evaluates to empty, the for loop just is a no-op, right?

        # Query ExampleModel instances with non-null site field

>         example_models = ExampleModel.objects.filter(site__isnull=False).select_related("site", "location")

Reviewer 3: Should we also check for `location__isnull=True` just to make sure we don't overwrite instances that already have a location set?

(edit) I see the admonition to this effect below, but still wonder if we should just *always* include it?

        for example_model in example_models:
            site_name = example_model.site.name
            # Point the location field to the corresponding "Site" LocationType Location
            # with the same name.
            example_model.location = Location.objects.get(location_type=site_location_type, name=site_name)

>             ExampleModel.objects.bulk_update(example_models, ["location"], 1000)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        ExampleModel.objects.bulk_update(example_models, ["location"], 1000)
```

> class  Migration(migrations.Migration):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
class Migration(migrations.Migration):
```

    dependencies = [
        # The dcim migration creates the Site Type and Region Type Locations that
        # your data models are migrating to. It has to be run **before** this migration.
        ("dcim", "0030_migrate_region_and_site_data_to_locations"),
        ("example_plugin", "0007_add_location_field_to_example_model"),
    ]

>     operations = []

Reviewer 4: I think as you are building the code, it would be better to only show what is added, and then show the entire file towards the end. It feels like it's becoming like a "spot the difference" puzzle to follow the lines of code that are adding/changed as you go. Also it would be more concise to only show the smaller snippets.

```

!!! important
    If your data models already have both `site`/`region` fields and a `location` field, it is important that you add `location__isnull=True` to the query. This will filter out the data model instances that already have `Location` instances assigned to their `location` fields. `Location` instances provide more specificity than `Site` instances, we do not want to lose that in the data migration and `location__isnull=True` prevents that loss from the data migration overriding the original `location` field value.

    For example:

    ```python
    example_models = ExampleModel.objects.filter(site__isnull=False, location__isnull=True).select_related("site", "location")
    ```

Finally, we need to add `migrations.RunPython` to the `operations` attribute in the migration class to execute this function when the migration is applied:

```python

# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 15:38
# 0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location

> from  django.db  import  migrations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
from django.db import migrations
```

        # Query ExampleModel instances with non-null site field
        example_models = ExampleModel.objects.filter(site__isnull=False).select_related("site", "location")
        for  example_model  in  example_models:
            site_name = example_model.site.name
            # Point the location field to the corresponding "Site" LocationType Location
            # with the same name.
            example_model.location = Location.objects.get(location_type=site_location_type, name=site_name)
            ExampleModel.objects.bulk_update(example_models, ["location"], 1000)

class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    dependencies = [
        # The dcim migration creates the Site Type and Region Type Locations that
        # your data models are migrating to. It has to be run **before** this migration.
        ("dcim", "0030_migrate_region_and_site_data_to_locations"),
        ("example_plugin", "0007_add_location_field_to_example_model"),
    ]
    operations = [
        migrations.RunPython(
            # Execute the function
            code=migrate_example_model_data_to_locations,
            reverse_code=migrations.operations.special.RunPython.noop,
        )

>     ]

Reviewer 4: Following the previous suggestion about reducing the code, this is the only thing that changed from the previous code gate, so maybe only highlight this, as I had recommended?

> ```

Reviewer 4: And then here at the end, show the entire migration file that was created.

## Remove Site/Region Related Fields from Migrated Data Models

> After you data migration is successful, we need to remove the `site`/`region` fields from your data model. You can do that by simply removing the `site`/`region` attributes from your model class:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the data migration is successful, we need to remove the `site`/`region` fields from your data model so that Nautobot will be able to remove the `Site` and `Region` models. You can do that by simply removing the `site`/`region` attributes from your model class:
```

```python

# models.py

> class  ExampleModel(OrganizationalModel):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
class ExampleModel(OrganizationalModel):
```

    # note that site field is gone
    location = models.ForeignKey(to="dcim.Location", on_delete=models.PROTECT, blank=True, null=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=20, help_text="The name of this Example.")
    number = models.IntegerField(default=100, help_text="The number of this Example.")
    csv_headers = ["name", "number"]

    class  Meta:
        ordering = ["name"]
...

```

After removing the `site` attribute, make the migration file by running:

> ```shell
> 
> nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_name]
> nautobot-server makemigrations example_plugin -n remove_site_field_from_example_model
> 
> ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```shell
# nautobot-server makemigrations [app_name] -n [migration_name]
nautobot-server makemigrations example_plugin -n remove_site_field_from_example_model
```
````

> ```

Reviewer 4: Same example command suggestion here.

The migration file might look like this:

```python

# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 17:09
# 0009_remove_site_field_from_example_model.py

from  django.db  import  migrations

class  Migration(migrations.Migration):

    dependencies = [
        ('example_plugin', '0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location'),
    ]

    operations = [
        migrations.RemoveField(
            model_name='examplemodel',
            name='site',
        ),
    ]

```

!!! important
    Before you apply this migration, you have to add an `run_before` attribute in this migration file to make sure that you remove `site`/`region` fields before `Site` and `Region` models themselves are removed. **Without it, your migration files might be out of order and your app will not start**.

> 

Reviewer 3: This raises an important question - how does this work if we have these migrations (including the `run_before`) in an app **that we install for the first time AFTER Nautobot has already migrated to 2.0**?

Author: Hmmm, I don't see a way for apps that are developed based on Nautobot v1.x to be installed after Nautobot has already migrated to v2.0.
1. Either revert Nautobot to v1.x, install the app, and then migrate to v2.0 together. (I don't even think the reversion is possible with the number of migrations)
2. Install the apps before migrating Nautobot to v2.0. 
3. Develop new apps that are the same as the old ones but v2.0 compatible?

```python
# Generated by Django 3.2.17 on 2023-02-22 17:09
# 0009_remove_site_field_from_example_model.py

from django.db import migrations

class Migration(migrations.Migration):
    
    # Ensure this migration is run before the migration that removes Region and Site Models
    run_before = [
        ("dcim", "0034_remove_region_and_site"),
    ]
    dependencies = [
        ("example_plugin", "0008_migrate_example_model_data_from_site_to_location"),
    ]

    operations = [
        migrations.RemoveField(
            model_name="examplemodel",
            name="site",
        ),
    ]
```

Apply the migration file by running:

```shell

> nautobot-server migrate [app_name]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# nautobot-server migrate [app_name]
```
